Experiments: sharing private APIs with lock() and unlock() (#46131)
WordPress/gutenberg: packages/experiments/README.md

# Experiments

`@wordpress/experiments`  enables sharing private `__experimental` APIs across `@wordpress` packages without
[publicly exposing them to WordPress extenders](https://make.wordpress.org/core/2022/08/10/proposal-stop-merging-experimental-apis-from-gutenberg-to-wordpress-core/#respond).

## Getting started

Every `@wordpress` package wanting to privately access or expose experimental APIs must opt-in to `@wordpress/experiments`:

```js
// In packages/block-editor/experiments.js:
import { __dangerousOptInToUnstableAPIsOnlyForCoreModules } from '@wordpress/experiments';
export const { lock, unlock } =
	__dangerousOptInToUnstableAPIsOnlyForCoreModules(
		'I know using unstable features means my plugin or theme will inevitably break on the next WordPress release.',
		'@wordpress/block-editor' // The package opting in
	);
```

> Each package may only opt-in once. The function name communicates that plugins are not supposed to use it. To make double and triple sure, the first argument must be that exact consent string, and the second argument must be a known `@wordpress` package that hasn't opted in yet – otherwise an error is thrown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each package may only opt in once. The function name communicates that plugins are not supposed to use it.

The function will throw an error if the following conditions are not met:

1. The first argument must exactly match the required consent string: `'I know using unstable features means my plugin or theme will inevitably break on the next WordPress release.'`. 
2. The second argument must be a known `@wordpress` package that hasn't yet opted into `@wordpress/experiments`
```

Optional copy update. Just to make it clear that the first arg must be an exact match of the `requiredConsent` value.

Also optional, because no one cares 😄 "opt in" and "opt out" are the verbs. "opt-in" and "opt-out" are adjectives. 

🍺

Author: Oh that's great, thank you!

# Experiments

`@wordpress/experiments`  enables sharing private `__experimental` APIs across `@wordpress` packages without
[publicly exposing them to WordPress extenders](https://make.wordpress.org/core/2022/08/10/proposal-stop-merging-experimental-apis-from-gutenberg-to-wordpress-core/#respond).

## Getting started

Every `@wordpress` package wanting to privately access or expose experimental APIs must opt-in to `@wordpress/experiments`:

```js
// In packages/block-editor/experiments.js:
import { __dangerousOptInToUnstableAPIsOnlyForCoreModules } from '@wordpress/experiments';
export const { lock, unlock } =
	__dangerousOptInToUnstableAPIsOnlyForCoreModules(
		'I know using unstable features means my plugin or theme will inevitably break on the next WordPress release.',
		'@wordpress/block-editor' // The package opting in
	);
```

Each package may only opt in once. The function name communicates that plugins are not supposed to use it.

The function will throw an error if the following conditions are not met:

> 1. The first argument must exactly match the required consent string: `'I know using unstable features means my plugin or theme will inevitably break on the next WordPress release.'`. 

Reviewer 2: ❤️

Reviewer 2: as much as I love this, I feel like we also need to be careful if we make this step to match that _promise_ with actually removing experimental interfaces and functions.

as someone recently pointed out in a DefinitelyTyped issue, the `__experimental` function arg has been in for a _long_ time, so continuing to call it experimental can feel ingenuine.

this came up with the original discussion about getting rid of experimental APIs. even if we say with our words that they will "quickly" disappear or break, at some point, if we have stabilized that code and built up a number of examples in Core of using them, then we have actually communicated that experimental code isn't, we've communicated something more like, "this stopped being experimental a while ago but we never renamed it"

want to make sure the severity of our words matches the integrity of our actions

Author: Agreed! While we seem to be stuck with certain deprecated and experimental APIs, e.g. editor.RichText is used by 255 plugins according to wpdirectory.net search, I hope that the ability to hide functions will catalyze adding and removing experiments at will.

Each package needs to start by registering itself:

```js
const { lock, unlock } = __dangerousOptInToUnstableAPIsOnlyForCoreModules(
	'<CONSENT STRING>', // See index.js, this may change without notice.
	'@wordpress/blocks'
);
```

The function name communicates that plugins are not supposed to use it. To make double and triple sure, the first argument must be that exact consent string, and the second argument must be a known `@wordpress` package that hasn't opted in yet – otherwise an error is thrown.

The `lock` and `unlock` API may be used as follows:

```js
// In the package exposing the experimental APIs:

> const { lock } = __dangerousOptInToUnstableAPIsOnlyForCoreModules(

Reviewer 3: Can you share an example with a package exporting an experimental component?

Author: Sure!

```js
// In @wordpress/package1/index.js:
import { lock } from './experiments';

export function DataListing({data}) {
	return <ExperimentalDataListing data={data} format='list' />;
}
function ExperimentalDataListing({data, format}) {
	if(format === 'list') {
		return (<ul> {/* ... */} </ul>)
	} else if(format === 'table') {
		return (<table> {/* ... */} </table>)
	}
}

// In @wordpress/package2/index.js:
import { DataListing } from '@wordpress/package1';
import { unlock } from './experiments';

const ExperimentalDataListing = unlock(DataListing);
export function MyComponent() {
	return (
		<ExperimentalDataListing data={data} format="table" />
	)
}
```

Without the `unlock()` function you can only use the public `DataListing` component. With the `unlock()` access you can also access the private `ExperimentalDataListing` component.

Reviewer 4: If I am understanding the proposal correctly, there is a missing `lock( DataListing, ExperimentalDataListing )` call in your example, right?

	'<CONSENT STRING>', // See index.js, this may change without notice.
	'@wordpress/blocks'
);
export const __experiments = {};
lock( __experiments, {
	privateFunction() {
		console.log( 'I am a private function!' );
	},
} );

// In the package consuming the experimental APIs:
const { unlock } = __dangerousOptInToUnstableAPIsOnlyForCoreModules(
	'<CONSENT STRING>', // See index.js, this may change without notice.

> 	'@wordpress/block-editor'

Reviewer 3: I'm probably not understanding how this work but I thought that to "unlock" '@wordpress/blocks' APIs, I need to provide the same package name here?

Author: @youknowriad The code you highlighted is a deterrent to only deal the `lock()` and `unlock()` functions to core WordPress packages. By passing the `@wordpress/block-editor` package name, I'm saying "This is `@wordpress/block-editor`" opting in, do not accept this name again". In other words, I couldn't do this:

```js
// Only the first opt-in for a given package name works:
_dangerousOptInToUnstableAPIsOnlyForCoreModules(
	'<CONSENT STRING>',
	'@wordpress/block-editor'
);

// Any subsequent attempt throws an exception:
_dangerousOptInToUnstableAPIsOnlyForCoreModules(
	'<CONSENT STRING>',
	'@wordpress/block-editor'
);
```

Author: The idea is to hide private data in public objects via `lock()`, and retrieve it via `unlock()` as follows:

```js
// In @wordpress/package1:
export const publicObject = {}; 
lock(publicObject, 'Private string');

// In @wordpress/package2:
import { publicObject } from '@wordpress/package1';

console.log(unlock(publicObject));
// "Private string"

console.log(publicObject);
// Just "{}", you can't directly retrieve the private string from that object
```

So you don't have to provide the source package name when unlocking. Instead, you import an object to unlock from that package – this makes the cross-package dependencies clear and prevents you from quietly using `@wordpress/package1` export without listing it in package.json.
